\documentclass[10pt]{article}
\usepackage{amsmath, amssymb}

\begin{document}

\section*{Math 504, 10/14}

We saw last time that any finitely generated module $M$ over a PID $R$
is a direct sum of quotients of $R/(d_i)$ of $R$, where we can arrange
either that $d_1 | d_2 | \cdots d_n$ or that every $d_i$ is either 0 or
a power $p^i$ of an irreducible element $p$ of $R$. We now want to see
that this decomposition is unique up to reordering the factors (and
multiplying the powers $p^i$ by units, which clearly does not affect
$R/(p^i)$. First look at the {\sl torsion} submodule $T$ of $M$,
consisting by definition of all $m\in M$ with $rm = 0 $ for some
$r\ne0\in R$. Since $R$ is a domain this really is a submodule; passing
to the quotient $M/T$ we clearly get the sum of all the copies of $R$
itself in the decomposition of $M$ as a sum of quotients of $R$. Any two
such decompositions must involve the same number of copies of $R$ (since
the rank of a free module over $R$ is well defined); we call this number
the {\sl free rank}of $M$. Now let $p$ be an irreducible element of $R,
m$ a positive integer, and look at the quotient $p^m T/p^{m+1}T$ (where
$p^m T$ denotes $\{p^m t: t\in T\}$, and similarly for $p^{m+1} T$.
Given a quotient $N = R/(q^r)$ of $R$ where $q\in R$ is irreducible, one
checks that $N'=p^n N/p^{n+1} N = 0$ unless $q = pu$ for some unit $u$
in $R$ and $r\ge n$; if $N'\ne0$, then $N'\cong R/(p)$, a vector space
of dimension one over the field $R/(p)$. Hence, for any fixed $p$ and
$m$, any two primary decompositions of $M$ must involve the same number
of summands isomorphic to $R/(p^k)$ for some $k\ge m$, whence any two
such decompositions must involve the same number of summands isomorphic
to $R/(p^m)$ itself. The upshot is that {\sl the primary decomposition
  of a finitely generated $R$-module $M$ is unique up to reordering the
  quotients of $R$ that are the summands}. This is the uniqueness part
of the classification.

The two most important applications occur when $R=\mathbf{Z}$ or
$R=K[x], K$ a field. In the first case we learn that {\sl any finitely
  generated abelian group is a finite direct product of cyclic groups,
  each either infinite or of prime-power order}. A finite abelian group
i$A$ s a finite direct product of cyclic groups, each of prime-power
order. If $A$ has at most $m$ solutions to the equation $x^m = 1$ for
all positive integers $m$, then it must be cyclic: no two factors can
occur whose orders are powers of the same prime $p$, lest there be too
many solutions to $x^{p^k}= 1$ for some $k$, so the cyclic factors have
relatively prime orders and their product is again cyclic. Since there
are always at most $m$ solutions to $x^m = 1$ in any field $K$, it
follows that {\sl any finite subgroup of the multiplicative group $K*$
  of a field is cyclic}. In particular, $\mathbf{Z}_p^*$ is always
cyclic, as mentioned in class last week. Next, as in class, take
$R=K[x]$ and let $V$ be a finite-dimensional vector space over $K$
equipped with a linear transformation from $V$ to $V$. We make $V$ into
a $K[x]$-module by decreeing that $x$ act on $V$ by $T: q(x) v = q(T)
v\in V$ for all $v\in V, q\in K[x]$. Then $V$ is isomorphic to the
direct sum of quotients $K[x]/(p_i^{r_i}$ for various irreducible
polynomials $p_i\in K[x]$ (the quotients must all be proper since $V$ is
finite-dimensional over $K$). Given a single quotient $V'=K[x]/(q), q(x)
= p^r(x) = x^n + \sum_{i=0}^{n-1} a_i x^i$, the matrix of the
transformation $T$ with respect to the fairly obvious basis
$1,x\ldots,x^{n-1}$ of $V'$ has ones below the main diagonal, , last
column $-a_0,\ldots,-a_{n-1}$ and zeroes elsewhere. We call this matrix
the {\sl companion matrix} $C(q)$ of $q$; it has minimal and
characteristic polynomials both equal to $q$ (up to sign). In general,
the matrix of $T$ with respect to a suitable basis of $V$ will be block
diagonal with blocks equal to the companion matrices attached to powers
of monic irreducible polynomials over $K$; this form is unique apart
from reordering the blocks. It is called the {\sl rational canonical
  form of $T$} (or of any of its matrices). The minimal polynomial of
$T$ is then the least common multiple of the polynomials whose companion
matrices furnish the blocks of its rational canonical form. If the
characteristic polynomial of $T$ happens to have all roots in $K$ (which
it always does if for example $K$ is algebraically closed, so that all
polynomials over it have a full complement of roots in it), then the
powers of polynomials arising in this way all take the form
$(x-a_i)^{n_i}$. In this case one generally chooses a different basis
for each block, namely the powers $(x-a_i)^{n_i-1},\ldots,x-a_i,1$ and
the corresponding matrix has $a_i$'s on the diagonal, ones above it, and
zeroes everywhere else. Such a matrix is called a {\sl Jordan block} and
the {\sl Jordan canonical form} of a square matrix realizes it as
similar to a block diagonal matrix with the blocks all Jordan blocks
(possibly with different eigenvalues). In particular, {\sl there are
  only finitely many similarity classes of $n\times n$ matrices having
  just one eigenvalue $a$}, for any such matrix $M$ is similar to one in
Jordan form with $a$'s on the diagonal and so is determined by its size;
the sizes involved are a set of positive integers adding to $n$. Such
unordered sets of positive integers summing to $n$ are called {\sl
  partitions} of $n$ and have a rich mathematical theory; they have been
studied for more than two and a half centuries.

\end{document}
