\documentclass[10pt]{article}
\usepackage{amsmath, amssymb}

\begin{document}

\section*{Math 504, 10/31}

Continuing where we left off last time, let $M,N$ be left $R$-modules.
Last time we constructed a projective resolution of $M$: $\cdots
P_n\cdots\rightarrow P_0 \rightarrow M\rightarrow 0$; applying
$\hom(\text{--},N)$ and omitting the first term, we have a sequence
$0\rightarrow\hom(P_0,N)\rightarrow\hom(P_1,N)\rightarrow\cdots$ which
is such that if we let $d_i$ denote the map from $\hom(P_i,N)$ to
$\hom(P_{i+1},N)$, then $d_{i+1} d_i = 0$. We call such a sequence $C$ a
{\sl cochain complex}. We may form the quotient $K_i/I_{i-1}$ of the
kernel $K_i$ of $d_i$ by the image $I_{i-1}$ of $d_{i-1}$; the elements
of $K_i$ are called {\sl $i$-cocycles} and those of $I_{i-1}$ {\sl
  $(i-1)$-coboundaries}. The quotient $K_i/I{i-1}$ is then called the
$i$th {\sl cohomology group $H^i(C)$ of $C$}; in this particular setting
it is denoted Ext$_R^i(M,N)$ and called the $i$th Ext group of $M$ and
$N$ (as $R$-modules). (This group is only an abelian group, not an
$R$-module.) Here \lq\lq Ext" should be thought of as standing for
\lq\lq extension"; it turns out that Ext$_R^1(M,N)$ measures extensions
of $M$ by $N$, that is, all short exact sequences $0\rightarrow
N\rightarrow P\rightarrow M\rightarrow 0$ of $R$-modules (up to an
equivalence defined later). We call the functors Ext$_R^i(\text{--},N)$(
{\sl higher (right) derived functors of $\hom$}, since the functor
$\hom(\text{--},N)$ is left but not right exact; we will later see that
a short exact sequence of $R$-modules gives rise to a long exact
sequence whose first three nonzero terms are $\hom$ groups and whose
remaining terms are Ext groups. It also turns out that the groups
Ext$_R^i(M,N)$ do not depend on our choice of projective resolution of
$M$. We now give some examples.

Suppose first that $R = \mathbf Z, M = \mathbf Z_n$. Then a projective
resolution of $M$ is given by $0\rightarrow\cdots\rightarrow
0\rightarrow\mathbf Z\rightarrow\mathbf Z\rightarrow\mathbf
Z_n\rightarrow 0$, where the map from $\mathbf Z$ to $\mathbf Z$ is
multiplication by $n$; in effect this is a finite resolution. Taking Ext
groups, we find that Ext$_{\mathbf Z}^0(M,N)$ consists of all
homomorphisms from $\mathbf Z$ to $N$ vanishing on multiples of $n$, or
equivalently homomorphisms from $\mathbf Z_n$ to $N$, while
Ext$_{\mathbf Z}^1(M,N)$ is $\hom(\mathbf Z,N)$ modulo $\hom(n\mathbf
Z,N)$, which is isomorphic to $N/nN$. The higher Ext groups
Ext$_{\mathbf Z}^i(M,N)$ are 0 (for $i\ge2$). For a more interesting,
but more complicated example, take $R = \mathbf Z_n, M = \mathbf Z_d$,
where $d$ is a divisor of $n$, say $n=dm$. Now a projective resolution
of $M$ is given by $\cdots\mathbf Z_n\rightarrow\mathbf
Z_n\rightarrow\cdots\rightarrow Z_n\rightarrow Z_d\rightarrow 0$, where
the maps from one copy of $\mathbf Z_n$ to the next are alternately
given by multiplying by $m$ and multiplying by $d$, the rightmost map
from $\mathbf Z_n$ to $\mathbf Z_n$ is multiplication by $d$, and the
map from $\mathbf Z_n$ to $\mathbf Z_d$is the canonical one (thought of
as multiplication by $m$). Here we have Ext$_{\mathbf Z_n}^0(\mathbf
Z_d,N) = \hom(\mathbf Z_d,N)$ (as before; this is a general fact holding
for left modules over any ring $R$), but now the other Ext groups
toggle: Ext$_{\mathbf Z_n}^i(\mathbf Z_d,N) = {}_m M/dM$ if $i$ is odd,
where ${}_m M$ denotes $\{x\in M: mx = 0\}$, while Ext$_{\mathbf
  Z_n}^i(\mathbf Z_d,N) = {}_d M/mM$ if $i$ is even. Many Ext groups
exhibit this periodic behavior; many others vanish in high degrees, as
we saw in the first example. We also see from these two examples that
Ext$_R(M,N)$ depends on $R$ as well as $M$ and $N$, as indicated by the
notation.

More generally, as noted above, Ext$_R^0(M,N)\cong\hom_R(M,N)$ for any
$R$-modules $M,N$ and any ring $R$. If $R$ is a PID and $M$ is finitely
generated, then we have seen that $M$ is the quotient of $R^n$ for some
$n$ be a free submodule which is the column span of an $n\times n$
matrix $A$ over $R$. If we make $A$ act on $N^n$ via left multiplication
(regarding $N^n$ as consisting of column vectors over $N$), then
Ext$_R^1(M,N)\cong n^n/AN^n$, while the Ext groups Ext$_R^i(M,N)$ are 0
for $i\ge2$.

Why don't the Ext groups depend on the choice of projective resolution
of $M$? To answer this, we begin by noting that, given an $R$-module map
$f$ from $M$ to $N$ and projective resolutions$\{P_i\}$ and $\{Q_i\}$ of
$M,N$, respectively, an easy inductive argument yields maps
$f_i:P_i\rightarrow Q_i$ making the obvious diagram combining the two
resolutions commute; applying $\hom_R(\text{--},P)$ to this diagram, we
get a map from Ext$_R^i(M,P)$ to Ext$_R^i(N,P)$ (so that
Ext$_R^i(\text{--},P)$ is indeed a covariant functor). Using something
you will construct in homework called a {sl cochain homotopy}, you will
show that the induced map on Ext groups is always 0 if $f=0$; whence it
will follow that any two projective resolutions of $M$ give rise to
isomorphic Ext groups with a fixed module $N$.

\end{document}
